# Research Highlights
-------------------------

This section is under construction. Come back soon!

## Astrobiology and Planetary Science

Every planet is a complex system. Earth's behavior is a mosaic of interractions between the atmosphere (air), hydrosphere (ocean), geosphere (rocks), and biosphere (life). Mars, Venus, Jupiter, and the other planets in our solar system are all complex systems as well, but with notable differences from Earth. By studying and comparing planets, we gain a stronger understanding of planetary science which helps us answer questions like "how did life originate?", "how did life evolve to its modern state?", and "is there life elsewhere in the universe?".

<!-- **The origin of life, the evolution of life, and the distribution of life in the universe are all dependent on planets**. It is thought that the first lifeform on Earth was generated by chemical reactions that occurred under specific conditions present on the ancient Earth. Could other planets provide the same set of conditions to generate life from non-living things? To look for life elsewhere in the universe, we can send spacecraft to other planets in our solar system or we can look at planets outside of our solar system with a telescope. Where should we look? Which planets are most likely to contain extant life? Answering these questions requires a strong understanding of planetary science. -->

## Ancient Mars

Modern Mars is cold and dry, but there was abundant liquid water on ancient Mars. We know this from two lines of evidence: (1) pictures of Mars's surface show geologic features that resulted from flowing liquid water, like ancient river valleys and deltas; (2) chemical analysis from Mars rovers has revealed the presence of minerals that can only form when there is liquid water.

All known life requires liquid water. Organisms on Earth occupy a wide range of environments: from acid mine drainage, to deep sea trenches, to permafrost ice. The one thing that all of these organisms have in common is that they need liquid water to grow, survive, and thrive. So, when we search for life on other planets, it is our first instinct to search for places that have liquid water. This is what makes ancient Mars so interesting: It is the only other place in the history of the solar system, besides Earth, where we have evidence for liquid water on the surface of a planet or moon.

This sets the stage for the major, overarching scientific question regarding ancient Mars: did ancient Mars have the conditions to support life? If so, was ancient Mars inhabited?

At the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Dr. Renyu Hu and I investigate the atmospheric conditions on ancient Mars. Warm conditions that prevent liquid water from freezing or boiling would require a thick atmosphere with a strong greenhouse effect on ancient Mars; however, modern Mars has a thin atmosphere with a negligible greenhouse effect. So, how did ancient Mars stay warm? We study this problem by building numerical models to trace the evolution of atmospheric species (e.g. CO2, N2, H2O, Ar) in Mars's atmosphere over the last 4 billion years. By tracking the sources and sinks of these species over time, we can reconstruct their abundances in Mars's ancient atmosphere and assess their contribution to the early Mars greenhouse effect.

#### **A Nitrogen-Rich Atmosphere on Ancient Mars.** 
In our first investigation, we focused specifically on the evolution of atmospheric nitrogen. Our models indicate that the ancient Martian atmosphere contained much more nitrogen than previously thought. A large amount of atmospheric nitrogen on ancient Mars may contribute substantially to the greenhouse effect by enhancing the effects of other greenhouse gases. 

See our paper: **[A nitrogen-rich atmosphere on ancient Mars consistent with isotopic evolution models](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41561-021-00886-y)**, published in Nature Geoscience.

#### **A Multi-Component Atmospheric Evolution Model.** 
In our second investigation, we are focused on simultaneously modeling the evolution of multiple important components in Mars's atmosphere. This work is in revision. Come back soon to see it published!

## Snowball Earth